[MASWE-0098] Add App Virtualization Environment Detection Not Implemented (#2853)
OWASP/owasp-mastg: weaknesses/MASVS-RESILIENCE/MASWE-0098.md

title: App Virtualization Environment Detection Not Implemented
id: MASWE-0098
alias: app-virtualization-detection
platform: [android]
profiles: [R]
mappings:

>   masvs-v1: [MSTG-RESILIENCE-3, MSTG-RESILIENCE-4, MSTG-RESILIENCE-5, MSTG-RESILIENCE-6]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  masvs-v1: [MSTG-RESILIENCE-4, MSTG-RESILIENCE-6]
```
I don't see what static-analysis has to do with this, but feel free to counter-argument :)

Emulator (5) also seems irrelevant. The goal of the test is to detect the encapsulation in an app virtualization app, which may or may not be running on an emulator.

Author: `I don't see what static-analysis has to do with this` None of these MSTG-IDs referring to static-analysis. @TheDauntless can you elaborate more on that?

Emulator detection is a stretch but I've encountered a few virtualizers like [TWOYI] (https://github.com/twoyi/twoyi). Yes, it's an emulator but it perfectly fits into the Android virtualization definition. Also, these MSTG-IDs are here only for legacy reasons.

Reviewer: I think I confused v1 and v2. My bad.

>   masvs-v2: [MASVS-RESILIENCE-1, MASVS-RESILIENCE-4]

Reviewer: Are there examples of app virtualization being used to dynamically analyse an application? It's possible, I guess, but why would you go this route vs just repackaging the app in the first place and add a debugger / frida / custom smali?

If not, we should remove resilience-4

Author: It's an alternative way. Many application protection solutions provide root detection, anti-repackaging, and dynamic instrumentation (Frida,  LSPosed, etc.) detection guards but they can't effectively detect virtualization environments. Virtualization doesn't require root, most virtualizers don't tamper APK integrity in any way - two fewer checks to worry about for the attacker.

Of course, it's not as efficient as using Frida on a rooted device but virtualization software provides a lot of its benefits as a trade-off.

Reviewer: Technically I can't immediately see how the virtualizers *don't* tamper with APK integrity. For cloning, the signature is definitely changed; for anything that wraps an APK, the signature is also changed (but calls to system APIs are hooked to return original signature, which is similar to hooking those things with Frida/xposed or smali patching).

It's ok if we keep this, but it would be nice to have an actual example of this technique being used for dynamic analysis. Maybe gameguardian could be enough (dynamically creating cheats or disabling ssl pinning or intercepting requests?) but I have limited experience with gameguardian.

Author: > Technically I can't immediately see how the virtualizers don't tamper with APK integrity. For cloning, the signature is definitely changed; for anything that wraps an APK, the signature is also changed (but calls to system APIs are hooked to return original signature, which is similar to hooking those things with Frida/xposed or smali patching).

It really depends on virtualization software. Some tamper, some don't. I think everything comes down to writing actual MASTG tests and adding demos here. I was planning to do that in the next iterations.

> status: draft

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
status: new
```

- **Unauthorized reading of application private data**: Malware utilizing Android virtualization software to virtualize a target application can access its private data. This can lead to exposure of sensitive user information, such as login credentials, financial data, and personal messages, compromising user privacy and security.
- **Unauthorized alteration of application private data**: By injecting malicious code through virtualization, malware can modify private data within an application. This alteration can result in unauthorized transactions, changes to user settings, or tampering with the application's functionality, potentially causing financial loss or operational disruptions.
- **Unauthorized escalation of privileges or identity theft**: Virtualization software can create a more permissive environment, enabling the execution of other malicious tools that would normally require root permissions.
- **Circumventing security mechanisms**: Virtualizers can dynamically tamper with the application's memory without altering the application's integrity. This allows malicious code to bypass certain anti-tampering security measures.

> ## Modes of Introduction

Reviewer 2: This section seems to extend and overlap with the description of the weakness. It should focus on the ways in which an application can introduce this weakness. For example, the use of certain libraries or APIs, the declaration (or lack thereof) of certain attributes or permissions, etc. Anything that indicates that the app can be run inside a virtualization environment, or "on-device container" as Android calls it.

Specific example: not opting out of on-device Android container apps via the REQUIRE_SECURE_ENV manifest flag.

We'll use this information later to define the tests.

Virtualization software introduces an additional layer between an application and its underlying operating environment, fundamentally altering how applications interact with system resources. This extra layer creates a more permissive environment, which can have significant implications for both legitimate use and potential threats.

> In a virtualized environment, the software effectively isolates the application from the actual operating system and hardware, allowing for a controlled and often more flexible interaction between the application and the system. This permissive environment can bypass standard security measures by providing enhanced privileges and capabilities that would not be available in a non-virtualized setting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a virtualized environment, the software effectively isolates the application from the actual operating system and hardware, allowing the virtualization software to monitor and control any interactions with the system. This is normally not possible on a non-rooted system.
```
The original phrasing is more about 'the app now has more permissions' but I don't see how that's relevant for the security of the application. It's "our" app that we're protecting, so it's not going to start misbehaving now that it suddenly has access to root permissions (e.g).

So this phrasing focusses more on the fact that interaction with the system cannot be trusted.

> For example, by emulating or partially recreating the Android system within an application sandbox, virtualization software can enable behavior that might otherwise be restricted or monitored. This allows applications to execute in a way that sidesteps traditional security constraints, making it easier to analyze, manipulate, or modify their behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, by emulating or partially recreating the Android system within an application sandbox, virtualization software can fully interact with the virtualized environment, even though the app appears to be running on a non-modified Android system. The virtualization software has full control over what happens inside of the virtualized system and is not restricted by typical security constraints, which makes it easier to analyze, manipulate, or modify the target app's behavior.
```
Updated in the same way as the previous update.

> ## Mitigations

Reviewer: Can we link to available resiliency tests, to make this more specific? And are there virtualization-specific tests that we can add to the MASTG?

Author: MASTG tests and links to existing tests are on my TODO list. I was planing to do that in following iterations.

> To mitigate the risks associated with Android virtualization software, developers should:

Reviewer 2: Add something like "Opt out of on-device Android container apps via the REQUIRE_SECURE_ENV manifest flag"
